.. -*- mode: rst -*-

==================
 Storage Backends
==================

S3QL can use different protocols to store the file system data. The
commands for creating, checking and mounting an S3QL file system
therefore expect you to specify a *storage URL* of the form
`<backend>:<path>`. The exact interpretation of `<path>` depends on
the backend that you use.

Currently, S3QL supports the following backends.


Local
=====

The local backend stores file system data in a directory on your local
computer. This is mostly used for testing. The storage URL for the
local backend has the form `local:/path/to/storage`.

SFTP
====

The SFTP backend is still in development.

FTP
====

The FTP backend is still in development.

Amazon S3
=========

To store your file system in an Amazon S3 bucket, use a storage URL of
the form `s3:<bucketname>`.

Note that the bucket names come from a global pool, so chances are
that your favorite name has already been taken by another S3 user.
Usually a longer bucket name containing some random numbers, like
`19283712_yourname_s3ql`, will work better.

If you do not already have one, you need to obtain an Amazon S3
account from `Amazon AWS <http://aws.amazon.com/>`_. The account is
free, you will pay only for the amount of storage that you actually
use.

You can enter your Amazon AWS access key id and your AWS secret access
key every time you mount, create or check the filesystem, but it is
recommended that you write them into the file `.awssecret` in your
home directory. Separate them by a newline and make sure that the file
is only readable by the owner, otherwise S3QL will refuse to use it.

Note that the AWS access key id and the AWS secret key are not the
user id and password that you use to log into the Amazon Webpage, but
the *access identifiers* shown under `My Account/Access Identifiers
<https://aws-portal.amazon.com/gp/aws/developer/account/index.html?ie=UTF8&action=access-key>`_.
